Azure AD user managed identity authentication for SQL server documentation (#17693)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/database-access/guides/azure-sql-server-ad.mdx

---

> title: Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Active Directory authentication (Preview)
> description: How to configure Teleport Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Active Directory authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Azure Active Directory authentication (Preview)
description: How to configure Teleport Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Azure Active Directory authentication.
```
nit: suggest using "Azure Active Directory" to be more descriptive, same as my suggestion below

---

<Details
  title="Version warning"
  opened={true}
  scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}
  scopeOnly={true}
  min="11.0"
>
  Database Access for Azure SQL Server with Active Directory authentication
  is available starting from Teleport `11.0`.
</Details>

<Admonition type="warning" title="Preview">
  Database Access for Azure SQL Server with Active Directory authentication is
  currently in Preview mode.
</Admonition>

This guide will help you to:

- Install and configure Teleport.
- Set up access to Azure SQL Server using Active Directory authentication.
- Connect to Azure SQL Server through Teleport.

![Teleport Database Access Azure SQL Server Active Directory](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/sql-aad.png)

## Prerequisites

- A SQL Server running on Azure.
- Teleport Database Service running on an Azure virtual instance.

(!docs/pages/includes/user-client-prereqs.mdx!)

## Step 1/7. Set up the Teleport Auth and Proxy

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/start-auth-proxy.mdx!)

## Step 2/7. Create a Teleport user

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx!)

> ## Step 3/7. Enable SQL Server Active Directory integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3/7. Enable SQL Server Azure Active Directory integration
```
nit

If you have it enabled, you can go to the next step.

1. Go to the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/), select **Database
   servers**, and select the database you wish to enable the Active Directory
   integration.
2. Select **Azure Active Directory** in the left-hand column.
3. Select **Set Admin**, and choose an account that will be added as an admin
   login to SQL Server.

> ![Azure SQL Server Active Directory admin page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-set-ad-admin.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Azure SQL Server Azure Active Directory admin page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-set-ad-admin.png)
```
nit

## Step 4/7. Configure Azure Managed Identities

> Teleport Database Service needs access tokens from Azure AD to authenticate with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Teleport Database Service needs access tokens from Azure AD to authenticate with
```

authentication token.

To create a new user-assigned managed identity, go to the **Managed Identities**
page in your [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/BrowseResource/resourceType/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity%2FuserAssignedIdentities)
and click on *Create*. Choose a name and resource group for it and create:

![Azure Create user managed identity page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-user-managed-identity.png)

Next, go to the **Teleport Database Service virtual machine instance**,
**Identity** section, select **User assigned**, and add the identity we just
created:

![Azure Virtual machine user managed identities page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-attach-managed-identity-vm.png)

## Step 5/7. Enable managed identities login on SQL Server

Connect to your SQL Server using a pre-existent authentication method or the
Activity Directory Admin set on
[Step 3](#step-37-enable-sql-server-active-directory-integration).

Create a [contained user](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/relational-databases/security/contained-database-users-making-your-database-portable?view=sql-server-ver16)
for your identities:
```sql

> CREATE USER [sqlserver-identity] FROM EXTERNAL PROVIDER;

Reviewer 2: @gabrielcorado What do you thinkg about putting also the following line here ? 
```
CREATE USER [sqlserver-identity] FOR LOGIN [sqlserver-identity]
```

Author: I've tested with a fresh SQL Server, and only having this query was enough to connect to the database. AFAIK the query you mentioned is used to create a contained user for a login, which seems to be possible only on Azure SQL Managed Instances:

> Because SQL Managed Instance supports Azure AD server principals (logins), using contained database users is not required.

In this case, we can create a login without having a contained user, meaning it can login into any database. I've opted for this single approach because it works in both instances. Do you think we should mention both methods?

```

> The newly created login will be attached to the public role, which might not
> have enough permissions to perform queries. Consider granting individual
> permissions or adding it to an existing role. For example, adding to
> `db_datareader` role:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The newly created user will be attached to the public role, which might not
have enough permissions to perform queries. Consider granting individual
permissions to the user or assigning it to an existing role. For example, add the user as a member of the
`db_datareader` role:
```

```sql
ALTER ROLE db_datareader ADD MEMBER [sqlserver-identity];
```

<Admonition type="note">
Since we’re creating contained users, this step needs to be done on each
database we want to be able to log in.
</Admonition>

## Step 6/7. Start Teleport Database Service

Generate a configuration file at `/etc/teleport.yaml` for the Database Service:

```code
$ teleport db configure create \
   -o file \
   --token=/tmp/token \
   --proxy=teleport.example.com:3080 \
   --name=sqlserver \
   --protocol=sqlserver \
   --uri=my-server.database.windows.net:1433 \
   --labels=env=dev
```

<Admonition
  type="tip"
  title="Tip"
>
  A single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for example
  multiple Database Service agents as well as the SSH Service or Application
  Service.
  
</Admonition>

Start the database service:

```code

> $ teleport start --config=/path/to/teleport-db.yaml --token=/tmp/token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ teleport start --config=/etc/teleport.yaml
```
nit: I don't think they need to specify the token again since it should be in the config they generated, and if they used `-o file` then the config will be at /etc/teleport.yaml

---

> title: Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Azure Active Directory authentication (Preview)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Database Access with SQL Server on Azure (Preview)
```

  currently in Preview mode.
</Admonition>

This guide will help you to:

- Install and configure Teleport.
- Set up access to Azure SQL Server using Azure Active Directory authentication.
- Connect to Azure SQL Server through Teleport.

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
![Teleport Database Access Azure SQL Server Azure Active Directory Self-Hosted](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/sql-aad.png)
</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
![Teleport Database Access Azure SQL Server Azure Active Directory Cloud](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/cloud-sql-aad.png)
</ScopedBlock>

## Prerequisites

- SQL Server running on Azure.
- The Teleport Database Service running on an Azure virtual instance.

(!docs/pages/includes/user-client-prereqs.mdx!)

## Step 1/7. Set up the Teleport Auth and Proxy Services

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/start-auth-proxy.mdx!)

## Step 2/7. Create a Teleport user

(!docs/pages/includes/database-access/create-user.mdx!)

## Step 3/7. Enable the SQL Server Azure Active Directory integration

If you have it enabled, you can go to the next step.

> * Go to the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/), select **Database

Reviewer 3: I think we can remove the bullets from this list as well and just use plain paragraphs.  For me, since these list items are complete sentences, there's not really a reason to make this a list.

---

> title: Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Azure Active Directory authentication (Preview)

Author: The only way I see is changing "Azure Active Directory" to "Azure AD" ([which is present in some Azure documents](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-ca/products/active-directory/#overview)) or removing the AD part. 

I can think of two alternatives:
1. "Database Access with SQL Server on Azure (Preview)" which is similar to the [Redshift title](https://goteleport.com/docs/database-access/guides/postgres-redshift/)
2. "Database Access with Azure SQL Server with Azure AD authentication (Preview)"

What do you think?

## Step 4/7. Configure Azure Managed Identities

The Teleport Database Service needs access tokens from Azure AD to authenticate with
SQL Server databases.

It uses the managed identities attached to its Virtual Machine to fetch the
authentication token.

To create a new user-assigned managed identity, go to the **Managed Identities**
page in your [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/BrowseResource/resourceType/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity%2FuserAssignedIdentities)
and click on *Create*. Choose a name and resource group for it and create:

![Azure Create user managed identity page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-user-managed-identity.png)

Next, go to the **Teleport Database Service virtual machine instance**,
**Identity** section, select **User assigned**, and add the identity we just
created:

![Azure Virtual machine user managed identities page](../../../img/database-access/guides/sqlserver/azure-attach-managed-identity-vm.png)

## Step 5/7. Enable managed identities login on SQL Server

Connect to your SQL Server using a pre-existent authentication method or the
Activity Directory Admin set on

> [Step 3](#step-37-enable-sql-server-azure-active-directory-integration).

Author: Depending on the user configuration, they can also have SQL authentication. But they'll have the admin configured, which can be used here so we can drop the other method.

About the link to the previous step, I just wanted to highlight to users which AD Admin I'm referring to. If we feel that it is clear enough, we can drop it.

`db_datareader` role:
```sql
ALTER ROLE db_datareader ADD MEMBER [sqlserver-identity];
```

<Admonition type="note">
Since we’re creating contained users, this step needs to be done on each
database we want to be able to log in.
</Admonition>

## Step 6/7. Start Teleport Database Service

Generate a configuration file at `/etc/teleport.yaml` for the Database Service:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
```code
$ teleport db configure create \
   -o file \
   --token=/tmp/token \
   --proxy=teleport.example.com:3080 \
   --name=sqlserver \
   --protocol=sqlserver \
   --uri=my-server.database.windows.net:1433 \
   --labels=env=dev
```
</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
```code
$ teleport db configure create \
   -o file \
   --token=/tmp/token \
   --proxy=mytenant.teleport.sh:443 \
   --name=sqlserver \
   --protocol=sqlserver \
   --uri=my-server.database.windows.net:1433 \
   --labels=env=dev
```
</ScopedBlock>

<Admonition
  type="tip"
  title="Tip"
>
  A single Teleport process can run multiple different services, for example
  multiple Database Service agents as well as the SSH Service or Application
  Service.
  
</Admonition>

> Start the database service:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Start the Database Service:
```

```code
$ teleport start --config=/etc/teleport.yaml
```

## Step 7/7. Connect

> Login into your Teleport Cluster. Your database should appear in the list of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Log in to your Teleport cluster. Your database should appear in the list of
```

available databases:

<ScopedBlock scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}>
```code
$ tsh login --proxy=teleport.example.com --user=alice
$ tsh db ls
# Name      Description         Labels
# --------- ------------------- -------
# sqlserver                     env=dev
```
</ScopedBlock>
<ScopedBlock scope={["cloud"]}>
```code
$ tsh login --proxy=mytenant.teleport.sh --user=alice
$ tsh db ls
# Name      Description         Labels
# --------- ------------------- -------
# sqlserver                     env=dev
```
</ScopedBlock>

To retrieve credentials for a database and connect to it:

```code
$ tsh db connect --db-user=sqlserver-identity --db-name=master sqlserver
```

Where `--db-user` is the managed identity name.

<Admonition type="note">
  The `mssql-cli` command-line client should be available in `PATH` of the machine
  you're running `tsh db connect` from.
</Admonition>

## Troubleshooting

### Could not find identity

If you see the error `could not find identity "my-identity" attached to the
instance` when connecting to your database, then the identity you’re trying to

> connect with is not attached to the Teleport Database Service Virtual Machine.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
connect with is not attached to the Teleport Database Service virtual machine.
```

> You can navigate to the [Virtual Machines](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/BrowseResource/resourceType/Microsoft.Compute%2FVirtualMachines),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can navigate to the [Virtual Machines](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/BrowseResource/resourceType/Microsoft.Compute%2FVirtualMachines) page within Azure Portal,
```

open the **Teleport instance**, **Identity** section, and choose **User
assigned** to see all identities you can connect with. If you don’t see your

> identity check [Step 4](#step-47-configure-azure-managed-identities) to see how

Reviewer 3: If following Step 4 correctly should prevent this error, do we need to include this troubleshooting step? Are there any instructions we could add to Step 4 to make it less likely for someone to hit this error?

Author: > Are there any instructions we could add to Step 4 to make it less likely for someone to hit this error?

I think Step 4 has all the information necessary. I've added this section for "returning users" where they try to connect to a non-configured user. I wasn't sure if this guide was the right place. Maybe place it on the [database troubleshooting page](https://goteleport.com/docs/database-access/troubleshooting/)? What do you think?

Reviewer 3: That makes sense—I think we can keep this as it is!

to add it.

### Login failed for the user

> When connecting to your database, you see the error `mssql: login error: Login

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When connecting to your database, and you see the error `mssql: login error: Login
```

failed for user '<token-identified principal>'`, it means your managed identity
login is not present on the SQL database. You’ll need to create their users as

> described in [Step 5](#step-57-enable-managed-identities-login-on-sql-server).

Reviewer 3: Same comment as the one re: Step 4: if completing Step 5 as intended avoids this error, are there any instructions we could add to Step 5 to make it less likely for someone to hit this error?
